Motor development disorders

This section focuses on understanding motor development disorders. Pataki (2010) clarifies this by stating that there is such variability in children with motor coordination difficulties that an acceptance of the breadth and spread of the problem is better than trying to define each one specifically. Children may have problems in motor planning, perceptual motor integration, neurological dysfunction and/or sensory integrative dysfunction. Given these problem areas, it can be explained that children may have specific difficulties with one or more the following aspects of motor functioning: muscular tone, gross or fine motor skills, muscular strength, motor planning, sequencing and speed of movements, or sensory integration.

We often take the motor development of children for granted, even though it is a complex combi- nation of cognitive and physical capacities. Multiple elements must work in a coordinated way to ensure the complex movements which we perform on a daily basis to operate smoothly and accu- rately. It is only when movements are seen to be clumsy for a long period of time that concern sets in.

Concern about muscle tone, the basic contraction of muscles, arises when it is too high or too low. When it is too high, children appear stiff and do not move smoothly; conversely, when it is too low, children appear floppy and lazy. Both levels of tone result in problems with the ability to perform motor skills adroitly. With regards to gross motor skills, coordination is based on the ability of the muscles or groups of muscles to work together. Additional to this, posture is important in performing gross motor skills appropriately. I f the posture is inappropriate for the skill being performed - for example, being slouched over when trying to throw a ball - then errors will occur in the execution of that skill. Functioning can also go wrong with fine motor skills requiring small muscles, which are the basis of coordination when a child first begins to manipulate items from approximately six months of age. If children have difficulties performing fine motor skills, then problems are also often present when children start to speak - that is, there are problems with the articulation of sounds and words. Muscular strength, which is voluntary muscle contraction to perform an activity, is often inadequate in children who have a motor development disorder. However, there are also children who appear strong and muscular but have high muscle tone (mentioned previously), which causes problems with motor skills.

Motor planning is another area where problems may occur. For many children, this aspect is automatic and intuitive. That is, they perform an activity seemingly without conscious thought - for example, learning how to climb an object in a playground. This aspect has a number of linkages to cognitive actions, such as detection of movement errors, selecting the correct responses, adequate and correct timing, and concentration. Children who have problems in this area fall easily, and have to think for a long time before they try an activity.

Linked closely to motor planning is the sequencing and speed of movements. This involves not only the order, but the speed at which movements are performed. Like, motor planning, for many children this occurs automatically and intuitively. Children with problems in this area also have difficulty with other skills which require sequencing, such as reading or writing a story. The other common issue slowness in performing movements. The final area of concern is that of sensory integration - how the brain deals with what comes in and what goes out. What comes in is a range of sensory information from what is seen, heard and felt (visual, auditory, tactile and proprioceptive information). What goes out includes movement. For children with problems with sensory integration, there is often poor integration of the information they are receiving; as such, they may have a dislike of a range of things ret::ited to the senses. For example, they may dislike being touched and dislike new noises.·As a result, they may become overstimulated in one or more of their senses, causing their movement to deteriorate.